In this video we will cover functions. You will learn how to use some of Python’s built-in
functions as well as how to build your own functions.
Functions take some input then produce some output or change.
The function is just a piece of code you can reuse.
You can implement your own function, but in many cases, you use other people’s functions.
In this case, you just have to know how the function works and in some cases how to import
the functions. Let the orange and yellow squares represent
similar blocks of code. We can run the code using some input and get
an output. If we define a function to do the task we
just have to call the function. Let the small squares represent the lines
of code used to call the function. We can replace these long lines of code by
just calling the function a few times. Now we can just call the function; our code
is much shorter. The code performs the same task.
You can think of the process like this: when we call the function f1, we pass an input
to the function. These values are passed to all those lines of code you wrote.
This returns a value; you can use the value. For example, you can input this value to a
new function f2. When we call this new function f2, the value
is passed to another set of lines of code. The function returns a value.
The process is repeated passing the values to the function you call.
You can save these functions and reuse them, or use other people’s functions.
Python has many built-in functions; you don't have to know how those functions work internally,
but simply what task those functions perform. The function len takes in an input of type
sequence, such as a string or list, or type collection, such as a dictionary or set, and
returns the length of that sequence or collection. Consider the following list.
The len function takes this list as an argument, and we assign the result to the variable L.
The function determines there are 8 items in the list, then returns the length of the
list, in this case, 8. The function sum takes in an iterable like
a tuple or list and returns the total of all the elements.
Consider the following list. We pass the list into the sum function and
assign the result to the variable S. The function determines the total of all the
elements, then returns it, in this case, the value is 70.
There are two ways to sort a list. The first is using the function sorted.
We can also use the list method sort. Methods are similar to functions.
Let's use this as an example to illustrate the difference.
The function sorted Returns a new sorted list or tuple.
Consider the list album ratings. We can apply the function sorted to the list
album ratings and get a new list sorted album rating.
The result is a new sorted list. If we look at the list album ratings, nothing
has changed. Generally, functions take an input, in this
case, a list. They produce a new output, in this instance, a sorted list.
If we use the method sort, the list album ratings will change and no new list will be
created. Let's use this diagram to help illustrate
the process. In this case, the rectangle represents the
list album ratings. When we apply the method sort to the list,
the list album rating changes. Unlike the previous case, we see that the
list album rating has changed. In this case, no new list is created.
Now that we have gone over how to use functions in Python, let’s see how to build our own
functions. We will now get you started on building your
own functions in python. This is an example of a function in python
that returns its input value + 1. To define a function, we start with the keyword
def. The name of the function should be descriptive
of what it does. We have the function formal parameter "A"
in parentheses. Followed by a colon.
We have a code block with an indent, for this case, we add 1 to "A" and assign it to B.
We return or output the value for b. After we define the function, we can call
it. The function will add 1 to 5 and return a
6. We can call the function again; this time
assign it to the variable "c" The value for 'c' is 11.
Let's explore this further. Let's go over an example when you call a function.
It should be noted that this is a simplified model of Python, and Python does not work
like this under the hood. We call the function giving it an input, 5.
It helps to think of the value of 5 as being passed to the function.
Now the sequences of commands are run, the value of "A" is 5.
"B" would be assigned a value of 6. We then return the value of b, in this case,
as b was assigned a value of 6, the function returns a 6.
If we call the function again, the process starts from scratch; we pass in an 8.
The subsequent operations are performed. Everything that happened in the last call
will happen again with a different value of "A"
The function returns a value, in this case, 9.
Again, this is just a helpful analogy. Let’s try and make this function more complex.
It's customary to document the function on the first few lines; this tells anyone who
uses the function what it does. This documentation is surrounded in triple
quotes. You can use the help command on the function
to display the documentation as follows. This will printout the function name and the
documentation. We will not include the documentation in the
rest of the examples. A function can have multiple parameters.
The function mult multiplies two numbers; in other words, it finds their product.
If we pass the integers 2 and 3, the result is a new integer.
If we pass the integer 10 and the float 3.14, the result is a float 31.4.
If we pass in the integer two and the string “Michael Jackson,” the string Michael
Jackson is repeated two times. This is because the multiplication symbol
can also mean repeat a sequence. If you accidentally multiply an integer and
a String instead of two integers, you won’t get an error.
Instead, you will get a String, and your program will progress, potentially failing later because
you have a String where you expected an integer. This property will make coding simpler, but
you must test your code more thoroughly. In many cases a function does not have a return
statement. In these cases, Python will return the special
“None” object. Practically speaking, if your function has
no return statement, you can treat it as if the function returns nothing at all.
The function MJ simply prints the name 'Michael Jackson’.
We call the function. The function prints “Michael Jackson.”
Let's define the function “No work” that performs no task.
Python doesn’t allow a function to have an empty body, so we can use the keyword pass,
which doesn’t do anything, but satisfies the requirement of a non-empty body.
If we call the function and print it out, the function returns a None.
In the background, if the return statement is not called, Python will automatically return
a None. It is helpful to view the function No Work
with the following return statement. Usually, functions perform more than one task.
This function prints a statement then returns a value.
Let's use this table to represent the different values as the function is called.
We call the function with an input of 2. We find the value of b.
The function prints the statement with the values of a and b.
Finally, the function returns the value of b, in this case, 3.
We can use loops in functions. This function prints out the values and indexes
of a loop or tuple. We call the function with the list album ratings
as an input. Let's display the list on the right with its
corresponding index. Stuff is used as an input to the function
enumerate. This operation will pass the index to i and
the value in the list to “s”. The function would begin to iterate through
the loop. The function will print the first index and
the first value in the list. We continue iterating through the loop.
The values of i and s are updated. The print statement is reached.
Similarly, the next values of the list and index are printed.
The process is repeated. The values of i and s are updated.
We continue iterating until the final values in the list are printed out.
Variadic parameters allow us to input a variable number of elements.
Consider the following function; the function has an asterisk on the parameter names.
When we call the function, three parameters are packed into the tuple names.
We then iterate through the loop; the values are printed out accordingly.
If we call the same function with only two parameters as inputs, the variable names only
contain two elements. The result is only two values are printed
out. The scope of a variable is the part of the
program where that variable is accessible. Variables that are defined outside of any
function are said to be within the global scope, meaning they can be accessed anywhere
after they are defined. Here we have a function that adds the string
DC to the parameter x. When we reach the part where the value of
x is set to AC, this is within the global scope, meaning x is accessible anywhere after
it is defined. A variable defined in the global scope is
called a global variable. When we call the function, we enter a new
scope or the scope of AddDC. We pass as an argument to the AddDC function,
in this case, AC. Within the scope of the function, the value
of x is set to ACDC. The function returns the value and is assigned
to z. Within the global scope, the value z is set
to ACDC After the value is returned, the scope of
the function is deleted. Local variables only exist within the scope
of a function. Consider the function thriller; the local
variable Date is set to 1982. When we call the function, we create a new
scope. Within that scope of the function, the value
of the date is set to 1982. The value of date does not exist within the
global scope. Variables inside the global scope can have
the same name as variables in the local scope with no conflict.
Consider the function thriller; the local variable Date is set to 1982.
The global variable date is set to 2017. When we call the function, we create a new
scope. Within that scope, the value of the date is
set to 1982. If we call the function, it returns the value
of Date in the local scope, in this case, 1982.
(click6) When we print in the global scope, we use the global variable value.
The global value of the variable is 2017. Therefore, the value is set to 2017.
If a variable is not defined within a function, Python will check the global scope.
Consider the function "AC-DC“. The function has the variable rating, with no value assigned.
If we define the variable rating in the global scope, then call the function, Python will
see there is no value for the variable Rating. As a result, python will leave the scope and
check if the variable Ratings exists in the global scope. It will use this value of Ratings
in the global scope within the scope of "AC-DC“. In the function, will print out a 9.
The value of z in the global scope will be 10, as we added one.
The value of rating will be unchanged within the global scope.
Consider the function Pink Floyd. If we define the variable Claimed Sales with
the keyword global, the variable will be a global variable.
We call the function Pink Floyd. The variable claimed sales is set to the string
“45 million” in the global scope. When we print the variable, we get a value
of “45 million.” There is a lot more you can do with functions.
Check out the lab for more examples.