In this module, we are going to talk about objects and classes.
Python has many different kinds of data types: Integers, Floats, Strings, Lists, Dictionaries,
Booleans. In Python each is an object.
Every object has the following: a type, internal representation, a set of functions called
methods to interact with the data. An object is an instance of a particular type.
For example, we have two types: type one and type two.
We can have several objects of type one as shown in yellow. Each object is an instance
of type one. We also have several objects of type two shown
in green. Each object is an instance of type two.
Let’s do several less abstract examples. Every time we create an Integer, we are creating
an instance of type integer, or we are creating an integer object.
In this case, we are creating five instances of type integer or five integer objects.
Similarly, every time we create a list, we are creating an instance of type list, or
we are creating a list object. In this case, we are creating five instances
of type list or five list objects. We can find out the type of an object by using
the type command. In this case, we have an object of type list.
We have an object of type integer. We have an object of type string.
Finally, we have an object of type dictionary. A class or type’s methods are functions
that every instance of that class or type provides.
It’s how you interact with the object. We have been using methods all this time,
for example, on lists. Sorting is an example of a method that interacts
with the data in the object. Consider the list Ratings.
The data is a series of numbers contained within the list.
The method sort will change the data within the object
We call the method by adding a period at the end of the object’s name and the method’s
name we would like to call with parenthesis. We have the ratings list represented in orange.
The data contained in the list is a sequence of numbers.
We call the sort method. This changes the data contained in the object.
You can say it changes the state of the object. We can call the reverse method on the list,
changing the list again. We call the method, reversing the order of
the sequence within the object. In many cases, you don't have to know the
inner workings of the class and its methods. You just have to know how to use them.
Next we will cover how to construct your own classes.
You can create your own type or class in Python. In this section, you will create a class.
The class has data attributes. The class has methods.
We then create an instances or instances of that class or objects.
The class data attributes define the class. Let's create two classes; the first class
will be a circle, the second will be a rectangle. Let's think about what constitutes a circle.
Examining this image all we need is a radius to define a circle and let's add color to
make it easier to distinguish between different instances of the class later.
Therefore, our class data attributes are radius and color.
Similarly, examining the image in order to define a rectangle, we need the height and
width. We will also add color to distinguish between
instances later. Therefore, the data attributes are color,
height, and width. To create the class circle, you will need
to include the class definition. This tells Python you are creating your own
class, the name of the class. For this course in parenthesis, you will always
place the term object. This is the parent of the class.
For the class rectangle, we change the name of the class, but the rest is kept the same.
Classes are outlines we have to set the attributes to create objects.
We can create an object that is an instance of type circle.
The color data attribute is red and the data attribute radius is four.
We can also create a second object that is an instance of type circle.
In this case, the color data attribute is green and the data attribute radius is two.
We can also create an object that is an instance of type rectangle.
The color data attribute is blue and the data attribute of height and width is 2.
The second object is also an instance of type rectangle; in this case, the color data attribute
is yellow, and the height is one, and the width is three.
We now have different objects of class circle or type circle.
We also have different objects of class rectangle or type rectangle.
Let us continue building the circle class in Python.
We define our class. We then initialize each instance of the class
with data attributes radius and color using the class constructor.
The function "in-it" is a constructor. It’s a special function that tells Python you are
making a new class. There are other special functions in Python
to make more complex classes. The ‘radius’ and ‘color’ parameters
are used to initialize the radius and color data attributes of the class instance.
The ’self’ parameter refers to the newly created instance of the class.
The parameters ’radius’ and ’color’ can be used in the constructor’s body to
access the values passed to the class constructor when the class is constructed.
We can set the value of the radius and color data attributes to the values passed to the
constructor method. Similarly, we can define the class rectangle
in Python. The name of the class is different.
This time the class data attributes are color, height and width.
After we have created the class, in order to create an object of class circle, we introduce
a variable; this will be the name of the object. We create the object by using the object constructor.
The object constructor consists of the name of the class, as well as the parameters.
These are the data attributes. When we create a Circle object we call the
code like a function. The arguments passed to the Circle constructor
are used to initialize the data attributes of the newly created Circle instance.
It is helpful to think of self as a box that contains all the data attributes of the object.
Typing the object's name followed by a dot and the data attribute name gives us the data
attribute value, for example radius. In this case, the radius is ten.
We can do the same for color. We can see the relationship between the self
parameter and the object. In Python, we can also set or change the data
attribute directly. Typing the object's name, followed by a dot
and the data attribute name, and set it equal to the corresponding value.
We can verify that the color data attribute has changed.
Usually, in order to change the data in an object we define methods in the class.
Let’s discuss methods. We have seen how data attributes consist of
the data defining the objects. Methods are functions that interact and change
the data attributes, changing or using the data attributes of the object.
Let's say we would like to change the size of a circle; this involves changing the radius
attribute. We add a method "add radius" to the class
Circle. The method is a function that requires the
self as well as other parameters. In this case, we are going to add a value
to the radius; we denote that value as r. We are going to add r to the data attribute
radius. Let's see how this part of the code works
when we create an object and call the add radius method.
As before, we create an object with the object constructor.
We pass 2 arguments to the constructor; the radius is set to 2 and the color is set to
red. In the constructor’s body, the data attributes
are set. We can use the box analogy to see the current
state of the object. We call the method by adding a dot followed
by the method name and parenthesis. In this case, the argument of the function
is the amount we would like to add. We do not need to worry about the self-parameter
when calling the method—just like with the constructor, Python will take care of that
for us. In many cases, there may not be any parameters
(other than self) specified in the method’s definition, so we don’t pass any arguments
when calling the function. Internally, the method is called with a value
of 8 and the proper self object. The method assigns a new value to self.radius.
This changes the object; in particular, the radius data attribute.
When we call the add radius method, this changes the object by changing the value of the radius
data attribute. We can add default values to the parameters
of a class’s constructor. In the labs, we also create the method called
"Draw Circle.” See the lab for the implementation of draw
circle. In the labs, we can create a new object of
type Circle using the constructor. The color will be red and the radius will
be 3. We can access the data attribute radius.
We can access the attribute color. Finally we can use the method “draw Circle”
to draw the circle. Similarly, we can create a new object of type
Circle. We can access the data attribute of radius.
We can access the data attribute color. We can use the method “draw circle” to
draw the circle. In summary, we have created an object of class
Circle called "red circle" with a Radius attribute of 3 and a Color attribute of red.
We also created an object of class Circle called "blue Circle" with a Radius attribute
of 10 and a Color attribute of blue. In the lab, we have a similar class for rectangle.
We can create a new object of type rectangle using the constructor. We can access a data
attribute of Height. We can also access the data attribute of Width.
We can do the same for the data attribute of Color.
We can use the method “draw Rectangle” to draw the rectangle.
So we have a class, an object that is a realization or instantiation of that class.
For example, we can create two objects of class Circle, or two objects of class Rectangle.
The “D I R” function is useful for obtaining the list of data attributes and methods associated
with a class. The object you’re interested in is passed
as an argument. The return value is a list of that object’s
data attributes. (The attributes surrounded by underscores
are for Internal Use and you shouldn’t have to worry about them.)
The regular-looking attributes are the ones you should concern yourself with, these are
the object’s methods and data attributes. There is a lot more you can do with objects
in Python. Check python.org for more info.