Hello everyone and welcome to data visualization with Python. I'm Alex
Aklson, a data scientist at IBM, and I'm your instructor for this course.
Throughout this course we're gonna learn how to create meaningful, effective, and
aesthetically pleasing data visuals and plots in python using Matplotlib and a
couple of other libraries namely Seaborn and Folium. The course will consist of
five modules. In module 1, we will briefly discuss data visualization and some of
the best practices to keep in mind when creating data visuals. We will then learn
about Matplotlib: its history, architecture, and the three layers that
form its architecture. We will also learn about the data set that we will use
throughout the course in these lectures as well as the hands-on sessions. We will
essentially be working with a data set that was curated by the United Nations
on immigration from different countries to Canada from 1980 to 2013. Finally we
will look into line plots and learn how to use Matplotlib
to generate them. In module 2 we will continue on with a few more basic data
visualizations such as area plots histograms and bar charts and we will
learn how to use matplotlib to create them and even create different versions
of these plots. In module 3 we will cover a set of specialized visualizations such
as pie charts box plots scatter plots and bubble plots and we will learn how
to create them still using Matplotlib. In module 4 we will learn about more
advanced visuals such as waffle charts, that provide a fine-grained view of
proportions of different categories in a data set. We will also learn about word
clouds, that depict word frequency or importance in a body of text. Finally, in
this module, we will explore another library,
Seaborn, which is built on top of Matplotlib to simplify the process of
creating plots and visuals and we will get a taste of its
effectiveness through the creation of regression plots. Finally, in module 5 we
will explore another library Folium which was built primarily to visualize
geospatial data. So we will learn how to create maps of different regions of the
world, superimpose markers of different shapes on top of the maps, and learn how
to create choropleth maps. After completing this course, you will be able
to use different visualization libraries in python namely Matplotlib, Seaborn, and
Folium to create expressive visual representations of your data for
different purposes. So let's get right into it.