Welcome to Python 101 for Data Science! In this course we’re going to cover the
fundamental topics of the Python programming language.
After completing all four modules, you’ll be able to start writing your very own Python
programs. Based on recent surveys, Python was and still
is the MOST popular, high-level, open-source programming language!
It is a powerful, fast and dynamic programming language that runs everywhere.
It’s also interactive, object-oriented, and very easy to learn.
Anyone can create programs with it. It’s particularly great for web development,
and scientific computing. With its vast libraries, it’s also useful for data visualization
and data analytics. This course covers Python 3 and its many new
features. It is comprised of four modules. We'll start off with Python basics, writing
your first program, and then cover, in detail, types, expressions, variables, strings and
string operations. In the 2nd module we'll introduce you to Python
data structures, namely lists and tuples, sets and dictionaries.
Lists and tuples, are called compound data types and are one of the key types of data
structures in Python. Sets and dictionaries are types of collections.
In the 3rd module we'll cover Python programming fundamentals, including conditions, branching,
loops, functions, and objects and classes. Specifically, you’ll learn about comparison
and logic operators, and the if, else, and elif statements, for and while loops, how
to use some of Python’s built-in functions, as well as how build your own functions, and
how to create objects and classes using object constructors and attributes.
And finally, in the 4th module we'll show you how to work with data in Python.
Specifically, how to read and write with the open method, and how to load, work with, and
save data in pandas. The hands-on labs after each module will have
you practice what you learn, using Jupyter notebooks on Cognitive Class.ai Labs.
There’s a lot to go over but by practicing all these concepts you’ll be well on your
way to using Python in your own applications. We’re sure you’ll be up and running with
Python in no time! So, adjust your headphones and let’s get
started!