In this video, we’ll be talking about Descriptive Statistics.
When you begin to analyze data, it’s important to first explore your data before you spend
time building complicated models. One easy way to do so is to calculate some
descriptive statistics for your data. Descriptive statistical analysis helps to
describe basic features of a dataset and obtains a short summary about the sample and measures
of the data. Let’s show you a couple different useful
methods. One way in which we can do this is by using
the describe() function in pandas. Using the describe function and applying it
on your dataframe, the "describe" function automatically computes basic statistics for
all numerical variables. It shows the mean, the total number of data
points, the standard deviation, the quartiles and the extreme values. Any NaN values are
automatically skipped in these statistics. This function will give you a clearer idea
of the distribution of your different variables. You could have also categorical variables
in your dataset. These are variables that can be divided up into different categories,
or groups and have discrete values. For example, in our dataset we have the drive
system as a categorical variable, which consists of the categories: forward-wheel drive, rear-wheel
drive, and four-wheel drive. One way you can summarize the categorical
data is by using the function value_counts(). We can change the name of the column to make
it easier to read. We see that we have 118 cars in the fwd (front
wheel drive) category, 75 cars in the rwd (rear wheel drive) category, and 8 cars in
the 4wd (four wheel drive) category. Boxplots are a great way to visualize numeric
data, since you can visualize the various distributions of the data.
The main features that the boxplot shows are the median of the data, which represents where
the middle datapoint is. The Upper Quartile shows where the 75th percentile
is, the Lower Quartile shows where the 25th percentile is. The data between the Upper
and Lower Quartile represents the Interquartile Range.
Next, you have the Lower and Upper Extremes. These are calculated as 1.5 times the interquartile
range above the 75th percentile, and as 1.5 times the IQR below the 25th percentile.
Finally, boxplots also display outliers as individual dots that occur outside the upper
and lower extremes. With boxplots, you can easily spot outliers
and also see the distribution and skewness of the data.
Boxplots make it easy to compare between groups. In this example, using Boxplot we can see
the distribution of different categories of the “drive-wheels” feature over price
feature. We can see that the distribution of price
between the rwd (rear wheel drive) and the other categories are distinct, but the price
for fwd (front wheel drive) and 4wd (four wheel drive) are almost indistinguishable.
Often times we tend to see continuous variables in our data. These data points are numbers
contained in some range. For example, in our dataset, price and engine
size are continuous variables. What if we want to understand the relationship
between “engine size” and ”price”? Could engine size possibly predict the price
of a car? One good way to visualize this is using a
scatter plot. Each observation in a scatter plot is represented
as a point. This plot shows the relationship between two variables:
The predictor variable: is the variable that you are using to predict an outcome. In this
case, our predictor variable is the engine size.
The target variable: is the variable that you are trying to predict. In this case, our
target variable is the price, since this would be the outcome.
In a scatterplot, we typically set the predictor variable on the x-axis, or horizontal axis
and we set the target variable on the y-axis or vertical axis.
In this case, we will thus plot the engine size on the x-axis and the price on the y-axis.
We are using the Matplotlib function “scatter” here, taking in x and a y variable.
Something to note is that it’s always important to label your axes and write a general plot
title, so that you know what you are looking at.
Now how is the variable Engine Size related to Price? From the scatterplot we see that
as the engine size goes up, the price of the car also goes up.
This is giving us an initial indication that there is a positive linear relationship between
these two variables.