In this video, we’ll cover the basics of grouping and how this can help to transform
our dataset.
Assume you want to know: Is there any relationship between the different types of “drive system”
(forward, rear and four-wheel drive) and the “price” of the vehicles?
If so, which type of “drive system” adds the most value to a vehicle?
It would be nice if we could group all the data by the different types of drive wheels,
and compare the results of these different drive wheels against each other.
In pandas this can be done using the group by method.
The group by method is used on categorical variables, groups the data into subsets according
to the different categories of that variable.
You can group by a single variable or you can group by multiple variables by passing
in multiple variable names.
As an example, let’s say we are interested in finding the average price of vehicles and
observe how they differ between different types of “body styles” and “drive wheels”
variables.
To do this, we first pick out the three data columns we are interested in, which is done
in the first line of code.
We then group the reduced data according to ‘drive wheels’ and ‘body style’ in
the second line.
Since we are interested in knowing how the average price differs across the board, we
can take the mean of each group and append this bit at the very end of line 2.
(The data is now grouped into subcategories and only the average price of each subcategory
is shown.
We can see that, according to our data, rear wheel drive convertibles and rear wheel drive
hardtops have the highest value, while four wheel drive hatchbacks have the lowest value.
A table of this form isn’t the easiest to read, and also not very easy to visualize.
To make it easier to understand, we can transform this table to a pivot table by using the pivot
method.
In the previous table, both ‘drive wheels’ and ‘body style’ were listed in columns.
A pivot table has one variable displayed along the columns and the other variable displayed
along the rows.
Just with one line of code and by using the pandas pivot method, we can pivot the “body
style” variable so it is displayed along the columns and the “drive wheels” will
be displayed along the rows.
The price data now becomes a rectangular grid, which is easier to visualize.
This is similar to what is usually done in Excel spreadsheets.
Another way to represent the pivot table is using a heatmap plot.
Heat map takes a rectangular grid of data and assigns a color intensity based on the
data value at the grid points.
It is a great way to plot the target variable over multiple variables and through this get
visual clues of the relationship between these variables and the target.
In this example, we use pyplot’s pcolor method to plot a heat map and convert the
previous pivot table into a graphical form.
We specified the Red-blue color scheme.
In the output plot, each type of “body style” is numbered along the x-axis, and each type
of “drive wheels” is numbered along the y-axis.
The average prices are plotted with varying colors based on their values, according to
the color bar.
We see that the top section of the heat map seems to have higher prices than the bottom
section.